# Schubert and Beethoven

The relationship between Schubert and Beethoven.

Schubert's music (like piano sonatas) were ignored for centuries. In 19th century, they were considered "not good enough" when compared to Beethoven's.

Reason why piano sonatas were neglected:

* too long (Schumann commented)
* too intimate
* structurally and dramatically inferior to Beethoven's
* not forming a coherent cylcle like beethoven's
* non-idiomatic and un-pianistic
* too repetitive
* not published during 19th century.

Revived by Schnabel, Brendel, Schiff and Richter.

* They lived in the same city for thirty-one years.
* Did they ever meet?
	* Nothing documented in writing.
* To what extend they influenced each other?

The problem with Schubert is that we don't have many written documents about his life. He tends to documents his life through music, not writing (i.e. letters, plus there is no need: all friends were in the same city). We only have:

* some diaries.
* A poem after diagnosed with syphilis. 

Schubert in his diary, 16 June 1816. Not very positive comments. Schubert condemned Beethoven's music for attempting "to goad people to madness instead of dissolving them in love, to incite them to laughter instead of listing them up to God."

1816 Vienna was in political unstability.

Both Beethoven and Schubert went to salons:

* Beethoven: noble
* Schubert: fellow artists.

1822 turn of attitute. 1822: very important year: diagnosis. Also:

* Poem
* Unfinished symphony
* Wanderer fantasy

This year, he wrote Op. 10 dedicate to Beethoven. But the dedication seems to be political. Diabelli might be encouraging Schubert to meet Beethoven, and he probably did but just out of courtesy.

The other way around, Beethoven's view about Schubert. Basically nothing. Yet Huttenbrenner documents on August 14, 1822, a letter to publisher Carl Friedrich Peters:

> [Schubert] is the second Beethoven ... might surpass me some day

Beethoven never speak nicely about young composers. So if this document is true, then it's Beethoven's only occasion of compliment.

Schubert asked his father to bury him next to Beethoven.

Anyways, different contradictory accounts of their meeting.

* Anton Schindler has all the very **unreliable** fancy accounts of their meeting.
* Ferdinand Schubert: yes
* Johan Friedrich
* Huttenbrenner

---

Schubert was the "prince" of Vienna. He secretely challenges the two "kings":

* Opera: Rossini
* Symphony: Beethoven

Friend says that Die Forelle is similar to Beethoven's Coriolan Overture, and Schubert wanted to throw it away. Keep trying to find new path (that's way there are so many unfinished works) that are different from Beethoven's.

Letter to Leopold Kupelwieser, parallel to Beethoven's H testament: both talks about happiness and other life stuff. Both are unhappy for the same reason: health problems.

From these letters, he expressed the idea that no one can help him, therefore that's why his music is so intimate because that's the only solution (i.e. exploring one's soul). Many friends, but still say he's friendless.

He started to follow Beethoven after 1824 (symphonies and instrumental works other than songs), but also want to create something new (hence many sketches). i.e. symphony, but new symphony. 1824 is the year when Beethoven 9 was premiered.

## Similarity in terms of music

very easy to find similarities

* some are far-fetched
* some are conscious tribute
* some are unconscious

The rhythm in Beethoven 7 symphony resonates with the Notre Dame school rhythmic modes. And Schubert got obsessed with this pattern.

* Dactylic
* ...

* Wanderer
* the death of the maiden
* impromptus.

Similarity to Beethoven: D960 vs. Op.130, D960 vs. Piano concerto No. 5.

Schubert (as well as others) suffered from being compared to Beethoven, "the shadow of Beethoven".

## Unpianistic

Luganski: the Schubert violin fantasy is the most difficult piece ever written in the literature.

The idea of repetition and lyrical long melodies (not great for developing motives).

Schubert in 1825 letter about D 845:

> the keys become singing voices under my hands

In winterreise, the piano part has more marks (probably because voice doesn't need to be taught).

Op 109 vs D 960, just by first sight can see the difference, for example, phrase length.

* D960: tonal detachment. Themes are not developed but visited like landscape.
* D960: stasis/detour (stop of time), the music doesn't go anywhere. That's Schumann's comment of "the simplicity of invention" by repetition.
	* Compare to Beethoven: every note is structurally important, not colorfully important.

Repetitions are boring if poorly performed.
